---
layout: post
title: 01. Timeline of the Application Process
date: 2016-09-08
weight: 1
aliases:
- 2016-09-08-01-timeline-of-the-application-process/
---

The following are steps and the general timelines in the application
process. We’ll address these steps in more detail later on.

{{% comment %}}
In Kenya, a college is different from a university. In the US, "college"
corresponds to "university" in Kenyan terms. This website uses "college"
and "university" interchangeably.
{{% /comment %}}

{{% comment %}}

This page will have sample dates for the timeline. We'll assume that you
sat for your KCSE in Dec 2022, and are looking to join a US university
in Sept 2024.

Note that folks joining American universities Sept 2023 have already
taken any required testing, and have [completed the
applications](#completing-the-college-applications) for their schools of
choice.

{{% /comment %}}

## Taking the National Exams (KCSE)

The application process usually begins after completing high school,
which is marked by taking the KCSE.

{{% comment %}}
The main challenges to submitting US college applications while still in
high school are lack of time (schedules tend to be packed with
KCSE prep) and lack of access to the internet (you'll need to research
your options).

International schools have a calendar that is more accommodating to US
college applications. The authors of this website went through the 8-4-4
system, so our advice on the college application timeline is based on
what we had.
{{% /comment %}}

Although the KCSE is not a requirement to your US college application,
ensure that you do well on it. Many Kenyan students apply to US colleges
and get rejected. Others gain admission, but they cannot afford to pay.
It's crucial that you do well on the KCSE to secure yourself a seat in
one of the Kenyan universities.

## School Search

Many applicants find themselves having "dream schools", which is not a
bad thing, but you need to widen your net to a few safety schools. As
much as you may really want to go to a certain school simply because you
have heard about it, it’s not always guaranteed that it is your best
match. It is important to embark on an intensive school search process.

{{% comment %}}

There is more to the US than Harvard. Don't be fooled by the term
"safety schools". Safety schools that still offer financial aid to
international students accept around 10% of applicants, so they're still
competitive.

{{% /comment %}}

See [09. Examples of US universities that Kenyans have attended on
scholarships]({{< ref
"college-guide/09-examples-of-us-universities-that-kenyans-have-attended-on-scholarships.md">}})
and [10. When Considering a University, What Should You Look For?]({{<
ref
"/college-guide/10-when-considering-a-university-what-should-you-look-for.md"
>}}) for a more detailed breakdown of how to go about the school search.

Furthermore, schools may have different testing requirements. The
earlier you decide on the set of schools that you'll be applying to, the
more focused your preparation will be.

{{% comment %}}

This can start as early as Jan 2023. Have a rough guess on the schools
that you aspire to join. The application process is demanding, and
having a concrete goal, e.g., "I want to go to Princeton", will help you
draw motivation when the well is running low. We recommend applying to
6-8 schools. By Nov/Dec, you should be able to list the schools that
you'll be sending applications to.

{{% /comment %}}

## Taking Standardized Tests (SAT, ACT, English-Proficiency)

You may think of standardized tests as the equivalent of the KCSE in the
US. The major difference is that the tests are offered multiple times
during the year, and you may retake them.

The test content does not completely overlap with what we learn in the
Kenyan system. You'll need time to get used to the test and [do lots of
practice]({{< ref
"/blog-posts/2017-06-11-studying-your-way-to-nigh-perfect-scores.md"
>}}).

You should take your standardized tests early enough to meet application
deadlines. Most applications deadlines are in late December, so you'll
need to take the required tests by November.

{{% comment %}}

For your top-choice school, the application deadline will be 1st Nov,
2023. You'll want to get all testing done in time for the applications.
We recommend doing the test in June 2023, so that if necessary, you may
retake the test in Aug or Oct 2023. Standardized tests heavily favor
practice, so start studying early -- Feb 2023 is a good start.

{{% /comment %}}

See [07. Tests That You Need to Take]({{< ref
"/college-guide/07-tests-that-you-need-to-take.md">}}) and [08. Test
Preparation Resources]({{< ref
"/college-guide/08-test-preparation-resources.md" >}}) for more info.

## Completing the College Applications

See [12. High School Transcript, School Report and Letters of
Recommendation]({{< ref
"/college-guide/12-high-school-transcript-school-report-and-letters-of-recommendation.md"
>}}) for items that you'll need from your high school.

{{% comment %}}

Don't underestimate the time needed for this. Your teachers will be busy
preparing the seniors for the KCSE. Start early.

{{% /comment %}}

Most schools accept the Common Application. This is the platform where
you fill in your application details, respond to school-specific essay
prompts, and submit your applications. See [14. Common Application
Essays and Writing Supplements]({{< ref
"/college-guide/14-common-application-essays-and-writing-supplements.md"
>}}) for more information.

{{% comment %}}
Used to be that accounts get wiped every year, but that's no longer so.
Feel free to create an account, and get a feel of the application
requirements. The essay prompts may change from year to year, but
everything else is mostly constant. [Thanks Ahmed for pointing this
out!]
{{% /comment %}}

There are two deadlines for college applications. The first one is in
October/ November for your top choice, while the other one is in
December/January for additional schools. See [13. Early Action (EA)/
Single Choice Early Action (SCEA)/ Early Decision (ED) & Regular
Decision (RD)]({{< ref "/college-guide/13-ea-scea-ed-and-rd.md" >}}).

Some schools schedule an interview between you and an alumni after
receiving your application.

## Applying for Financial Aid

Applying for financial aid (e.g. a scholarship) is separate from your
college application. For early applications, the deadline is in
November, while for regular applications, the deadline is in
January/February. Schools may have their separate application process
for financial aid. See [15. Financial Aid Applications]({{< ref
"/college-guide/15-financial-aid-applications.md" >}})

{{% comment %}}

Scholarships are typically called "grants" because you don't pay for
them. Another form of financial aid are student loans. These need to be
paid back, like [Kenya's HELB Loans](https://www.helb.co.ke/).

{{% /comment %}}

## Admission Notification

The moment you've been waiting for! If you applied early, you'll get the
school's decision in December. Otherwise, you'll get in March/April.
Godspeed! See [16. Receiving Admissions
Decisions](16-receiving-admissions-decisions.md)

## Get Your Kenyan Passport Ready

Passport processing time may vary. If you don't have a passport, get one
ASAP. Don't wait till you hear back from the universities. Spare
yourself the trouble of anxiously camping outside the passport
application office for days on end.

At the very least, you want to get one by April so that when you can
start the visa application process as soon as possible.

## Get Your Student Visa Stamp

After committing to attend a university, they'll send you a form that
you'll present to the US Embassy in Kenya to get a student visa. Visa
interview slots may run out so book yours early. See [17. The I-20 Form,
SEVIS Fee and Visa
Interview](/college-guide/17-the-i20-form-sevis-fee-and-visa-interview.md)

Additionally, getting your visa early allows you to book the flight
early enough to get cheaper tickets. See [18. Coming to the US - Travel
Arrangements > Booking Flights]({{< ref
"/college-guide/18-coming-to-the-us-travel-arrangements.md#booking-flights"
>}}).

## Travel Prep and Departure

There are a couple things to take care of: vaccinations, booking a
flight, shopping, etc. See [18. Coming to the US - Travel
Arrangements]({{< ref
"/college-guide/18-coming-to-the-us-travel-arrangements.md" >}})

September is now here. It’s time to leave for your new home. Your school
may send someone to pick you up from the airport. Another option is to
use Uber/Lyft. While there is public transit, you don't want to miss a
stop or get confused if you need to make several switches.
