---
title: 02. What will you gain from US universities?
date: 2016-09-08
weight: 2
aliases:
- 2016-09-08-02-what-will-you-gain-from-us-universities/
tags:
- kenya-vs-us-university
---

Leaving friends and family for study in a foreign country seems
daunting. Yet, deciding to cross the Atlantic to study in the US might
be one of the best decisions you can make in your life. Nothing comes
easy, and the road to studying in the most elite of colleges demands
sacrifice and commitment. Here's why you should consider studying in the
US:

## Career Opportunities

There is ample support, typically through a staffed and dedicated
careers office, to help you land internships and jobs. The careers
office offers services such as: one-on-one appointments, resume & cover
letter workshops, job fairs where company employees & recruiters source
talent, job/internship listings, etc.

The universities have strong alumni networks, which avail even more
career opportunities. Want to pursue a career in X? Well, there is a
database of alumni working on X looking to mentor current students. Or
maybe alumni from company Y are hosting a panel on campus where they'll
discuss how working on X is like, and point you to open positions in Y.

{{% comment %}}
In an ideal meritocratic world, only your intrinsic qualifications would
matter; where you got your education from would be inconsequential.
However, opportunities are not equally available for all.

[A survey of senior level and executive managers by Indeed (a top
website for job
listings)](https://offers.indeed.com/rs/699-SXJ-715/images/InteractiveResearch_ExecutiveSummary.pdf)
found that a degree from an elite university helps open the door for job
opportunities.

Furthermore, some universities are feeder schools into various
industries. For example, some tech companies assign dedicated recruiters
(crucial in ensuring someone reviews your application in time) to
universities with renown computer science schools, e.g. Stanford, MIT,
etc.
{{% /comment %}}

## Breadth and Depth

The liberal arts curriculum offered by most schools in the US allows you
to study a wide range of subjects, while at the same time giving you an
in-depth insight into your major. Even if you’re pursuing an Engineering
degree, you’ll have slots for classes from other disciplines such as
Economics, Visual Arts, Literature, Foreign Languages, Entrepreneurship,
Politics, etc. This allows you to mingle with people from different
majors in your classes and definitely helps you become an all-rounded
individual. It’s also just fun studying things you’d never thought of
before.

## World-Class Education

Most US universities are highly ranked. In these schools, you are taught
by world-renowned professors and rub shoulders with smart students from
all over the world. This challenging yet invigorating academic
atmosphere pushes you to your limits and makes you a better version of
yourself. The huge endowments that US colleges have also mean that they
make you as comfortable as possible. The libraries are huge: UoN’s
library system has half a million volumes while Princeton has twenty-two
million volumes. Professors have labs which are addressing ideas like
Quantum Computing, De Novo Proteins, Wireless Communications, Anonymous
Internet Networks, Autonomous Cars, Nanofabrication, Machine Learning
Algorithms, etc.

The massive financial endowments make ambitious summer projects
feasible, e.g. [Stanford funded Norah Borus to run a coding camp in
Nairobi in the summer of
2016](https://stanfordwics.medium.com/founding-a-youth-based-tech-organization-8b91980217f6).

## Financial Aid

This should have come top of the list because it makes it affordable and
possible to study in the US. It may seem absurd but you could get a
financial aid package so good that it would be cheaper to study in the
US than at a private university in Kenya. Financial Aid comes in form of
grants and loans; most international students get grants, meaning you
don’t have to pay them back.

## Independence

Studying away from home inevitably makes you learn how to depend on
yourself. You get to learn so much about yourself and you cultivate
responsibility. While your parents may want to send you money, take that
burden off their shoulders and plan your own finances. There are
numerous student jobs which can provide enough income for daily
expenses. You will learn how to improve yourself overall. Independence
is a definitely one of the most important traits to lead a good future
life.

## Create Memories

Being in the US and away from family pushes you out of your comfort
zone. You make new friends from all over the world, try out new things
(lots of concerts in NYC!), and with time these new experiences form a
vital part of who you are. Those four years will prove unforgettable!

## Friends from All Over the World

US universities exemplify this in an array of ways. Studying in the US
accords you the opportunity to meet and interact with people from
different countries and cultures. Through such interactions, you are
made to realize that not everyone shares similar beliefs as you do or
sees things from the same perspective as you do. With time, you acquire
a global mindset which allows you to be less biased towards other
cultures and to appreciate your own culture more. Besides this, you
learn to approach everything from a more objective perspective; which is
a key life skill to have.
