---
title: 03. What are US universities looking for?
date: 2016-09-08
weight: 3
aliases:
- 2016-09-08-03-what-are-us-universities-looking-for-in-international-students/
---

The major difference between university admissions in Kenya and those in
the US is the number of factors considered for admission. For Kenyan
universities, your grade in the KCSE national exam determines which
university and course you'll be admitted to. In contrast, American
universities consider academic and non-academic factors when deciding
who to admit.

{{% comment %}}

The buckets below are obtained from the Common Data Set, a common
document filled by universities to be used by publishers. {{% cite CDS
%}}

{{% /comment %}}

## Academic Factors

### Rigor of Secondary School Record

Relative to the resources available at your school, did you challenge
yourself academically?

{{% comment %}}

In American high schools, academic rigor usually takes the form of
Advanced Placement classes in which high school students take on
college-level classes and earn college credits. Such credits allow them
to place out of certain introductory classes when they enroll into
college. {{% cite cbAP %}}

{{% /comment %}}

### Academic GPA

To calculate your high school GPA, add together your grades on the 4.0
scale after converting them from letter grades, and divide the sum by
the number of classes you are taking. {{% cite cbGPA %}} For example:

<iframe
  src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vSFsPkYBQRDoYSPolI9K3nUSwVGlzmvK_PShp9WuOjuyuKxs47GIk2ZbE1m_9518_aarOyg52Fg4wN4/pubhtml?gid=0&amp;single=true&amp;widget=true&amp;headers=false&amp;chrome=false"
  style="width: 100%; min-height: 400px">
</iframe>

### Class Rank

### Standardized Test Scores

### Application Essay

## Non-academic Factors

### Extracurricular Activities

### Talent/Ability

### Character/Personal Qualities

### First-Generation

### Interview

### Alumni Relation

### Geographical Residence

### State Residency

### Religious Affiliation/Commitment

### Racial/Ethnic Status

### Volunteer Work

### Work Experience

### Level of Applicant's Interest

This section has been extracted from the [EGF
Guide](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0BxcN6nrpsXL6VUlPWThlaTdtZ1E?resourcekey=0-zab22OZ9EjcJWeng8nFplA&usp=sharing).

While an admission decision based purely on test scores and grade point
averages is easier to explain, such scores seldom reflect an applicant’s
intellectual curiosity, creativity, originality and love of learning.
Applicants can distinguish themselves for admission in a number of ways.
Some show unusual academic promise through achievements in study or
research that place them among the best potential scholars of their
generation.

Most are “well rounded” and have contributed in various ways – academic
and nonacademic – to the lives of their schools or communities. Others
are “well-lopsided” with demonstrated excellence in a particular
endeavor—academic, extracurricular or otherwise. Still, others bring
perspectives formed by unusual personal circumstances or experiences.
The energy, commitment, and dedication it takes to achieve the various
kinds and degrees of excellence are revealed not by test scores, but by
students’ activities outside the classroom, the testimony of teachers
and guidance counselors, and by alumni/ae and staff interview reports.

### Academics

Most colleges identify academic achievement and potential as the most
important factor influencing admission. Truly brilliant students will
usually be admitted if they appear to be of good character. However,
school grades and test scores are not always reliable indicators of real
brilliance and schools will look for signs of intellectual curiosity,
creativity, originality and a love of learning.

* Is there evidence of original work such as writing, poetry,
  mathematical or scientific research? Did the student participate in
  competitions, contests, symposia and [science] congresses?

* Are there unusual factors such as poor school resources or personal
  difficulty that may give a context to an applicant’s intellectual
  ability and promise?

Applicants may also demonstrate their potential to contribute
academically by achieving high marks in a challenging program of study
or by making the most use of resources available to them in their
school/community.

### Extracurriculars

This will include an applicant’s participation in life outside the
classroom, including significant contributions to the life of their
school or community in athletics, music, art/drama and student
leadership. In addition to school extracurricular activities and
athletics, students can describe significant community, employment, or
family commitments. There are many who spend a great deal of time
helping to run their household, preparing meals and caring for siblings
or making money with a part-time job to help the household meet
expenses.

Schools have no preference for one activity over another, but they look
most favorably upon those students who have committed themselves to
their chosen activities over a period of time and who have shown energy,
discipline, and enthusiasm in working with others.

They also recognize that some schools may not have a full range of
extracurricular activities and they take this into account while
evaluating applicants. Admissions Committees are concerned most of all
to know how well students used the resources available to them.
Extracurricular activities need not be exotic — most are not — and
substance is far more important. A student who has made the most of the
opportunities offered by their secondary school is much more likely to
do so during college and beyond.

This applies to academic life as well as extracurricular activities.

### Personal

Personal qualities and character provide the foundation upon which each
admission rests. Some personal qualities like maturity, character,
leadership, self-confidence, warmth of personality, sense of humor,
energy, and grace under pressure are essential for someone to thrive in
an unfamiliar and competitive environment thousands of miles from home.

Some applicants, on the other hand, may have an unusual attractiveness
of personality that would enrich the college community, including
unusual concern for others or desire to make a difference. However, any
candidate about whom there is evidence of serious weakness of character
is rejected.

Most college graduates often report that the education they received
from fellow classmates was a critically important component of their
college experience. The education that takes place between roommates, in
dining halls, classrooms, research groups and extracurricular activities
depends on selecting students who will reach out to others.

The admissions committees, therefore, take great care to attempt to
identify students who will be outstanding “educators,” and would
contribute towards a great college community.

## Who is reading the application & what are they seeking?

> “But the truth is that essay readers are nothing more than bright,
> curious, conscientious people – frazzled by the pile of folders ahead
> of them, perhaps, and probably a little sleepy, but basically open to
> what the kids have to write. They don’t want to have to spend a lot of
> time unmixing metaphors and trying to guess who the writer really is.
> They want writers who will speak to them directly from personal
> experience. (..) The real you. That is your voice.” – Bill Mayher,
> College Admissions Mystique

They seek evidence of good academics & academic initiative of
extracurricular activities of leadership & impact ‘beyond the numbers,
of who you are, of what you add’

They wonder “Would I like to share a bedroom with this person?” They
reject on: arrogance (boasting), bigotry (prejudice), signs of trickery,
dishonesty, lying, unfair play, but also on dull essays.

They also try to understand what you have achieved in your context:

* 71% of those applying through Common Application last year had at
  least one parent with a Bachelor’s Degree

* Are you the first in your family to finish high school, or to attend
  university?

* One of few in your village to go to high school?

* The first in your high school to apply abroad?

## How will the admissions officer know this?

Therefore, in telling your story – think, analyze, provide others with
the information to help them help you

### School profile

* Where do people go on to university in last three years, how many went
  to university?

* Where is it ranked – if high ranked, show you had good teaching; if
  low ranked, show you did well.

* Guidance counselor reference – family background, how many children,
  both parents alive, live with grandparents, IDP, parents’ jobs –
  peasant farmers

* School resources – how many computers, how many books in the school
  library

### Managing the information

* What does the admissions officer need to know about me/my life?

* What strengthens my application?

* Focus & selective, not every detail

* Who is the best person to tell them (teacher, headteacher, me in an
  essay)?

* Avoid duplication.

* How can I help this person to provide accurate, compelling
  information?

### Academics and Academic Initiative

> ‘Interested in learning for learning’s sake’

* The key issue ahead of extracurricular & leadership/impact – but on
  its own not sufficient

* Vocal member of the class? Someone who asks interesting questions?

* Intellectual potential, love of learning – how have you developed your
  interest?

* Academic initiative – e.g. a teacher of lower classes, coordinator of
  maths club, district/regional awards, independent research.

### Extracurricular activities

* What do you spend your time doing besides studying?

* What excites and motivates you? Follow your interests.

* What do you add beyond the figures (your SAT scores)?

* Very impressive would be e.g. significant commitment to one or more
  activities, usually with regional or national recognition, leadership
  or dedication

* BUT overcoming extreme challenge to attain high level of
  leadership/involvement is seen as most impressive

### Leadership and impact

* Positions of responsibility

  * At school? (*Did you teach lower classes?*)

  * At work?

  * At home, as carer, wage-earner, for livestock?

  * In the community, church, President’s Award, scouts?

* How were you selected? What does it involve? What was the feedback
  from people who worked with you?

* Do you initiate things, or do you follow behind?

### Work Experience

* What have you been doing at your workplace?

* How can you show the challenges, dedication, the integrity needed?

* Have you been involved in other roles apart from your standard
  assigned roles?

However, college admissions is not an exact science… It isn’t a
predictable and equitable process. Warmest congratulations if you get
in. But if you don’t, it truly doesn’t say anything about you, your
capacities, your potential to study abroad next year or in five years

> “We aren’t looking for well-rounded individuals, we’re looking for a
> well-rounded class”

## References

1. {{< citation
  id="egfUSGuide"
  title="A Guide to Applying to Undergraduate Institutions in USA"
  url="https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0BxcN6nrpsXL6VUlPWThlaTdtZ1E?resourcekey=0-zab22OZ9EjcJWeng8nFplA&usp=sharing"
  authors=`Catrin Davies; Isaac Ochieng'; Mary Kiarie; Wanjiku Mungai;
  Susan Kemboi; Benjamin Munyao; John Kimani; Kenneth Kiambati;
  Simeon Kamunde; Martha Obasi; Trevor Omangi` >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="CDS"
  title="Home - Common Data Set"
  url="https://commondataset.org/"
  accessed="2023-12-03" >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="cbGPA"
  title="How to Convert (Calculate) Your GPA to a 4.0 Scale"
  url="https://bigfuture.collegeboard.org/plan-for-college/college-basics/how-to-convert-gpa-4.0-scale"
  accessed="2023-12-03" >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="WignallRigor"
  title="What's Academic Rigor? Why is it So Important?"
  author="Allison Wignall"
  url="https://www.collegeraptor.com/getting-in/articles/questions-answers/academic-rigor-important/"
  date="2022-12-22"
  accessed="2023-12-04" >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="cbAP"
  title="Advanced Placement® (AP) – College Board"
  url="https://ap.collegeboard.org/"
  accessed="2023-12-04" >}}
