---
title: 03. What are US universities looking for?
date: 2016-09-08
weight: 3
aliases:
- 2016-09-08-03-what-are-us-universities-looking-for-in-international-students/
- 03-what-are-us-universities-looking-for-in-international-students/
---

The major difference between university admissions in Kenya and those in
the US is the number of factors considered for admission. For Kenyan
universities, your grade in the KCSE national exam determines which
university and course you'll be admitted to. In contrast, American
universities consider academic and non-academic factors when deciding
who to admit.

The list of factors is compiled from the Common Data Set (CDS), a
document filled by universities to be used by publishers. {{% cite CDS
%}}

{{% comment %}}

If you want to know a quick view of a college, look up its
latest Common Data Set. For example, [searching for "Harvard common data
set"](https://www.google.com/search?q=harvard+common+data+set&oq=harvard+common+data+set&gs_lcrp=EgZjaHJvbWUyDggAEEUYFBg5GIcCGIAEMg0IARAAGJECGIAEGIoFMgYIAhBFGEDSAQgzNDU1ajBqMagCALACAA&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8)
surfaces
[https://oira.harvard.edu/common-data-set/](https://oira.harvard.edu/common-data-set/),
and from there, you can view the latest CDS.

{{% /comment %}}

## Academic Factors

### Rigor of Secondary School Record

Relative to the resources available at your school, did you challenge
yourself academically? Colleges use information provided by the school
counselor, e.g.,

* How many AP, IB, Honors, and Cambridge courses are offered?
* What is the maximum number of such classes that a student can take in
  a given year?

{{% cite schoolReport %}}

A lot of Kenyan high schools do not provide such classes. Not to worry
though, you will not be penalized for not taking courses that were not
available at your school.

### Academic GPA

To calculate your high school GPA, add together your grades on the 4.0
scale after converting them from letter grades, and divide the sum by
the number of classes you are taking. {{% cite cbGPA %}} For example:

<iframe
  src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vSFsPkYBQRDoYSPolI9K3nUSwVGlzmvK_PShp9WuOjuyuKxs47GIk2ZbE1m_9518_aarOyg52Fg4wN4/pubhtml?gid=0&amp;single=true&amp;widget=true&amp;headers=false&amp;chrome=false"
  style="width: 100%; min-height: 400px">
</iframe>

### Class Rank

This is provided by the school counselor in the school report, e.g., are
you in the top 5% of your class? How many other students share the same
rank? {{% cite schoolReport %}}

### Standardized Test Scores

Standardized tests include the SAT and the ACT. These are different from
the tests that you took in high school. See [this page]({{< ref
"/college-guide/07-tests-that-you-need-to-take" >}}) for more
information on standardized tests.

### Personal Essay

The personal essay is limited to 650 words, and you can choose one of
several prompts. For example, one of the prompts in the 2023-2024
application cycle was: *Some students have a background, identity,
interest, or talent that is so meaningful they believe their application
would be incomplete without it. If this sounds like you, then please
share your story.* {{% cite Lombardi2023 %}}

See [this page]({{< ref
"/college-guide/14-common-application-essays-and-writing-supplements"
>}}) for more information on the college essay. A lot goes into writing
a great personal essay.

### Recommendation

Your college application also includes recommendations from your high
school teachers. They typically include:

* Your academic, extracurricular, and personal characteristics.
* Relevant context for your performance and involvement, e.g.,
  particularities of family situation.
* Observed problematic behaviors that the admissions committee should
  explore further.

{{% cite teacherEvaluation %}}

Beyond grades, is there evidence of original work, e.g., writing,
poetry, research? Did you participate in competitions and symposia? Did
you succeed despite adversity, e.g., poor school resources or personal
difficulty? Did you tutor lower classes? {{% cite egfUSGuide %}}

See [this page]({{< ref
"/college-guide/12-high-school-transcript-school-report-and-letters-of-recommendation"
>}}) for more information.

## Non-academic Factors

### Extracurricular Activities

Extracurricular activities encompass how you spend your time beyond
studying, e.g., athletics, clubs, art, drama, student leadership,
significant family/community involvement, part-time jobs, etc. Schools
recognize that some schools may not have a full range of extracurricular
activities, and evaluate how well students used the resources available
to them. Were you significantly committed to an activity? Did you
receive recognition for it? Were you in a leadership position? {{% cite
egfUSGuide %}}

### Talent/Ability

Some colleges give special consideration to students who have
demonstrated excellence in areas of interest to the colleges. {{% cite
CDS %}} More so if there is regional/national recognition. {{% cite
egfUSGuide %}}

### Character/Personal Qualities

Your teacher may be asked to describe you on various fronts, e.g.,
intellectual promise, quality of writing, creative thought, productive
discussion, faculty respect, disciplined habits, maturity, motivation,
leadership, integrity, reaction to setbacks, concern for others,
self-confidence, initiative, etc. {{% cite teacherEvaluation %}}

Some personal qualities like maturity, character, leadership,
self-confidence, warmth of personality, sense of humor, energy, and
grace under pressure are essential for someone to thrive in an
unfamiliar and competitive environment thousands of miles from home. {{%
cite egfUSGuide %}}

### First-Generation

Are you the first in your family to finish high school, or to attend
university? Are you one of the few in your village to go to high school?
Are you the first in your high school to apply abroad? {{% cite
egfUSGuide %}}

### Interview

Some universities enlist their alums to interview students who apply to
the school. While the interview provides you with the chance to learn
more about the school, the alums also write a recommendation to the
school after the interview.

### Alumni/ae Relation

Some colleges practice legacy admissions, where having a relative who is
an alumni is considered a plus factor. However, given recent Supreme
Court ruling against considering race, legacy admissions have come under
scrutiny and some colleges are dropping the special consideration. {{%
cite LaGesse2023 %}}

### Geographical Residence / State Residence

Some colleges give special consideration to students from a particular
region, state, or country of residence. {{% cite CDS %}}

Public universities tend to favor applicants from within the state.
Private universities tend to favor applicants from under-represented
regions. {{% cite Kowarski2018 %}}

### Religious Affiliation/Commitment

Some colleges give special consideration to applicants who are
affiliated with a certain church/faith/religion. {{% cite CDS %}}

### Volunteer Work

Some colleges give special consideration to students with activities
done on a volunteer basis, e.g., tutoring, hospital care, working with
the elderly or disabled, etc. {{% cite CDS %}}

### Work Experience

Some colleges give special consideration given to students who have been
employed prior to application, whether for relevance to major,
demonstration of employment-related skills, or as explanation of
studentâ€™s academic and extracurricular record. {{% cite CDS %}}

### Level of Applicant's Interest

Some colleges consider demonstrated interest, e.g., joining their
mailing list, attending admissions events, applying early
action/decision, etc. {{% cite Sarikas2023 %}}

## References

1. {{< citation
  id="CDS"
  title="Common Data Set"
  url="https://commondataset.org/"
  url_2="https://commondataset.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/CDS_2023-2024.pdf"
  accessed="2023-12-03" >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="egfUSGuide"
  title="A Guide to Applying to Undergraduate Institutions in USA"
  url="https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0BxcN6nrpsXL6VUlPWThlaTdtZ1E?resourcekey=0-zab22OZ9EjcJWeng8nFplA&usp=sharing"
  authors=`Catrin Davies; Isaac Ochieng'; Mary Kiarie; Wanjiku Mungai;
  Susan Kemboi; Benjamin Munyao; John Kimani; Kenneth Kiambati;
  Simeon Kamunde; Martha Obasi; Trevor Omangi` >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="cbGPA"
  title="How to Convert (Calculate) Your GPA to a 4.0 Scale"
  url="https://bigfuture.collegeboard.org/plan-for-college/college-basics/how-to-convert-gpa-4.0-scale"
  accessed="2023-12-03" >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="schoolReport"
  title="Common App School Report"
  url="https://commonapp.my.salesforce.com/sfc/p/#d0000000eEna/a/8X0000011Ken/ll9soTdjMLh73NA1QlQ0FR4fZlDcb1LeXjVEh55XY2E"
  accessed="2023-12-23" >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="teacherEvaluation"
  title="Common App Teacher Evaluation"
  url="https://commonapp.my.salesforce.com/sfc/p/#d0000000eEna/a/8X0000011Kf6/Jv1Pvg8yvluXZaNdUG3INHJJve.MUDFJPrA3IUgnCZM"
  url_2="https://commonapp.my.salesforce.com/sfc/p/#d0000000eEna/a/8X0000011KfC/gIYG1GmlNYawiRVUYZ.90hSowCr5el1b97obX7Hprn4"
  accessed="2023-12-23" >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="Lombardi2023"
  author="Meredith Lombardi"
  title="2023-2024 Common App essay prompts"
  date="2023-02-04"
  url="https://www.commonapp.org/blog/2023-2024-common-app-essay-prompts"
  accessed="2023-12-23" >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="LaGesse2023"
  author="Shane LaGesse"
  title="Legacy Admissions: What It Is and Why Colleges Are Reconsidering It | Higher Education"
  date="2023-07-21"
  url="https://www.usnews.com/higher-education/articles/legacy-admissions-what-it-is-and-why-colleges-are-reconsidering-it"
  accessed="2023-12-23" >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="Kowarski2018"
  author="Ilana Kowarski"
  title="How Your Hometown Could Affect Your College Admissions Chances"
  date="2018-09-10"
  url="https://www.usnews.com/education/best-colleges/articles/2018-09-10/how-your-hometown-could-affect-your-college-admissions-chances"
  accessed="2023-12-23" >}}

1. {{< citation
  id="Sarikas2023"
  author="Christine Sarikas"
  title="The 99 Demonstrated Interest Colleges: Complete List"
  date="2023-10-18"
  url="https://blog.prepscholar.com/colleges-that-track-demonstrated-interest"
  accessed="2023-12-23" >}}
