---
title: 11. Organizations in Kenya that Help Students Apply to US Universities
date: 2016-09-08
weight: 11
aliases:
- 2016-09-08-11-college-access-programs/
---

College access programs are non-profit organizations that guide students
in their college applications, e.g., test preparation, essay guidance,
college choices, etc. These programs are free to students; their funds
come from donations and grants.

*These programs do not provide scholarships.* Instead, they help
students craft stellar applications to top universities. These
universities are the ones that grant scholarships.

{{% comment %}}

See [15. Financial Aid Applications]({{< ref
"/college-guide/15-financial-aid-applications.md" >}}) for more
information about scholarships.

{{% /comment %}}

These programs especially target high-performing low-income applicants.
This is largely a matter of who needs more help in completing a college
application. That said, Education USA offers guidance to all applicants,
whether they are in a college access program or not.

Some of the programs require that students to submit applications, and
pass interviews. Once KCSE results are announced, check the programs'
websites as their applications tend to open up at that time and close
after a couple of weeks.

Unless otherwise specified, the programs only accept applications from
students who completed the most recent KCSE.

## [EaSEP (Education and Social Empowerment Program)](http://www.easep.org/)

The students stay at a camp in Nandi Hills for weeks at a time. The
program also pays for its students' [standardized tests]({{< ref
"/college-guide/07-tests-that-you-need-to-take.md" >}}).

Class Size: 10 students

Requirements:

* A- or better on the KCSE
* Demonstrated leadership
* Preferably from (or schooled in) western Kenya.

Application Instructions:
[https://www.easep.org/apply.html](https://www.easep.org/apply.html)

## EALP (Equity African Leaders Program)

EALP is a merit-based program that enrolls high-school graduates. The
selection criteria for these candidates include:

* Best male and female student in every district.

* Wings to Fly scholars who have attained A- and above in their KCSE
  exams.

Although EALP does NOT give you any scholarship to study abroad, they
provide the following:

* Two camps where you are assigned a mentor who guides you through the
  application process. You also get to do SAT and ACT exam practice to
  improve your scores and orient you to the exam that you will
  eventually take.

* Revision material such as books and other online material.

* A stipend once you get admitted to a university abroad. This caters
  for your air ticket as well as basic shopping once you get to the US.

* Recommendations that boost your chances of getting into schools
  abroad.

* Mailing of documents to the respective schools that you apply to.

This is also a leadership program and NOT everyone enrolled to it gets
to apply abroad. Within EALP, you still have to qualify to get into the
College Counselling program. This process is merit-based as well.

## [KenSAP (Kenya Scholar-Athlete Program)](http://kensap.org/)

The students stay at a camp in Nandi Hills for weeks at a time. The
program also pays for its students' [standardized tests]({{< ref
"/college-guide/07-tests-that-you-need-to-take.md" >}}). Of the college
access programs, KenSAP is very selective.

Class Size: 15 - 20 students

Requirements:

* A- of at least 79 points on the KCSE
  * Students that scored between 74 and 78 may still request to apply,
    but need an additional statement explaining why they should be
    considered alongside higher scoring candidates.
* B or better in English.

Application Instructions:
[https://www.kensap.org/apply](https://www.kensap.org/apply)

{{% comment %}}

KenSAP is now accepting applications from students that completed the
KCSE in December 2022.

{{% /comment %}}

Note that, despite its name, KenSAP does not work with students seeking
athletic scholarships.

## EducationUSA

EducationUSA has always been providing counseling for students who wish
to apply to US universities. To access these resources, set up an
appointment with the College Advisor through this email address:
NairobiEdUSA@state.gov. You can either set up an individual appointment
or attend a group session. To get the most out of the individual
appointment, have copies of academic certificates that you already have
(KCSE result slip, high school transcript, SAT test scores, etc) and a
paragraph describing your career objectives. The group session is held
on the last Friday of every month, but you’ll also need an appointment
to be allowed into the US Embassy.

EducationUSA offers access to test prep books, computers equipped with
internet access, workshops (choosing schools to apply to, applying for
financial aid, applying for student visas and even sessions with
admissions officers from US universities).

In addition to these resources that are available for free to everyone,
EducationUSA also has the College Club, a college access program for
high achieving low-income students. The College Club requires that you
submit a complete application. Send an email at around March to
EducationUSA to inquire about the application. In addition to the
guidance offered to all students interested in applying to US
universities, the College Club pays for the test fees of its selected
applicants.

Whether you end up in the general advisees or in the College Club has
nothing to do with your chances of getting a scholarship. Everyone has
access to the same resources, except for the payment of test fees.

## [Zawadi Africa](http://www.zawadiafrica.org/)

Sorry dudes - Zawadi only takes girls. The applicant should have:

* Completed her secondary school examination i.e. The Kenya Certificate
  of Secondary Examination (KCSE)

* Demonstrated academic excellence ( A- or A Plain or a B+ under
  exceptional circumstances i.e. from marginalized areas)

* Demonstrated leadership qualities e.g. in school as a prefect, in the
  community, church, leadership in peer related activities etc.)

* Overcome insurmountable odds such as serious financial challenges,
  oppressive social-cultural practices such as early marriages and
  Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) etc. in order to attain academic
  excellence.

* Come from a financially disadvantaged background.

* Demonstrated clear financial need

Applications open in February and close in April. Check Zawadi’s website
for updates. Their offices in Kenya can be found at:

>Zawadi Africa Education Fund-Kenya <br>Lenana Road, Kilimani <br>Cathy
Flats, Suite No. 4 <br>P.O.Box 59949-00200 Nairobi,Kenya <br>Tel:
+254202305655 <br>Email: info@zawadiafrica.org
